Union Budget 2025-26 — Highlights
Source: https://static.pib.gov.in/WriteReadData/specificdocs/documents/2025/feb/doc202521492701.pdf (PIB, Government of India)

Ministry of Finance
HIGHLIGHTS OF UNION BUDGET 2025-26
Posted On: 01 FEB 2025 12:42PM by PIB Delhi
PART A
Union Minister for Finance and Corporate Affairs Smt Nirmala Sitharaman presented Union Budget
2025-26 in the Parliament today. The highlights of the budget are as follows:
Budget Estimates 2025-26
The total receipts other than borrowings and the total expenditure are estimated at ₹ 34.96 lakh crore and
₹ 50.65 lakh crore respectively.
The net tax receipts are estimated at ₹ 28.37 lakh crore.
The fiscal deficit is estimated to be 4.4 per cent of GDP.
The gross market borrowings are estimated at ₹ 14.82 lakh crore.
Capex Expenditure of ₹11.21 lakh crore (3.1% of GDP) earmarked in FY2025-26.
AGRICULTURE AS THE 1 ENGINE OF DEVELOPMENT
Prime Minister Dhan-Dhaanya Krishi Yojana - Developing Agri Districts Programme
The programme to be launched in partnership with the states, covering 100 districts with low
productivity, moderate crop intensity and below-average credit parameters, to benefit 1.7 crore farmers.
Building Rural Prosperity and Resilience
A comprehensive multi-sectoral programme to be launched in partnership with states to address under-
employment in agriculture through skilling, investment, technology, and invigorating the rural economy.
Phase-1 to cover 100 developing agri-districts.
Aatmanirbharta in Pulses
Government to launch a 6-year “Mission for Aatmanirbharta in Pulses” with focus on Tur, Urad and
Masoor.
NAFED and NCCF to procure these pulses from farmers during the next 4 years.
Comprehensive Programme for Vegetables & Fruits
A comprehensive programme to promote production, efficient supplies, processing, and remunerative
prices for farmers to be launched in partnership with states.
Makhana Board in Bihar
ST
2/1/25, 1:25 PM Press Release:Press Information Bureau
https://pib.gov.in/PressReleseDetail.aspx?PRID=2098382&reg=3&lang=1 1/11
A Makhana Board to be established to improve production, processing, value addition, and marketing of
makhana.
 
National Mission on High Yielding Seeds
A National Mission on High Yielding Seeds to be launched aiming at strengthening the research
ecosystem, targeted development and propagation of seeds with high yield, and commercial availability
of more than 100 seed varieties.
Fisheries
Government to bring a framework for sustainable harnessing of fisheries from Indian Exclusive
Economic Zone and High Seas, with a special focus on the Andaman & Nicobar and Lakshadweep
Islands.
Mission for Cotton Productivity
A 5-year mission announced to facilitate significant improvements in productivity and sustainability of
cotton farming, and promote extra-long staple cotton varieties.
Enhanced Credit through KCC
The loan limit under the Modified Interest Subvention Scheme to be enhanced from ₹ 3 lakh to ₹ 5 lakh
for loans taken through the KCC.
Urea Plant in Assam
A plant with annual capacity of 12.7 lakh metric tons to be set up at Namrup, Assam.
MSMEs AS THE 2 ENGINE OF DEVELOPMENT
Revision in classification criteria for MSMEs
The investment and turnover limits for classification of all MSMEs to be enhanced to 2.5 and 2 times
respectively.
Credit Cards for Micro Enterprises
Customized Credit Cards with ₹ 5 lakh limit for micro enterprises registered on Udyam portal, 10 lakh
cards to be issued in the first year.
Fund of Funds for Startups
A new Fund of Funds, with expanded scope and a fresh contribution of ₹ 10,000 crore to be set up.
Scheme for First-time Entrepreneurs
A new scheme for 5 lakh women, Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes first-time entrepreneurs to
provide term-loans upto ₹ 2 crore in the next 5 years announced.
Focus Product Scheme for Footwear & Leather Sectors
ND
2/1/25, 1:25 PM Press Release:Press Information Bureau
https://pib.gov.in/PressReleseDetail.aspx?PRID=2098382&reg=3&lang=1 2/11
To enhance the productivity, quality and competitiveness of India’s footwear and leather sector, a focus
product scheme announced to facilitate employment for 22 lakh persons, generate turnover of ₹ 4 lakh
crore and exports of over ₹ 1.1 lakh crore.
Measures for the Toy Sector
A scheme to create high-quality, unique, innovative, and sustainable toys, making India a global hub for
toys announced.
Support for Food Processing
A National Institute of Food Technology, Entrepreneurship and Management to be set up in Bihar.
Manufacturing Mission - Furthering “Make in India”
A National Manufacturing Mission covering small, medium and large industries for furthering “Make in
India” announced.
INVESTMENT AS THE 3 ENGINE OF DEVELOPMENT
I. Investing in People
Saksham Anganwadi and Poshan 2.0
The cost norms for the nutritional support to be enhanced appropriately.
Atal Tinkering Labs
50,000 Atal Tinkering Labs to be set up in Government schools in next 5 years.
Broadband Connectivity to Government Secondary Schools and PHCs
Broadband connectivity to be provided to all Government secondary schools and primary health centres
in rural areas under the Bharatnet project.
Bharatiya Bhasha Pustak Scheme
Bharatiya Bhasha Pustak Scheme announced to provide digital-form Indian language books for school
and higher education.
National Centres of Excellence for Skilling
5 National Centres of Excellence for skilling to be set up with global expertise and partnerships to equip
our youth with the skills required for “Make for India, Make for the World” manufacturing.
Expansion of Capacity in IITs
Additional infrastructure to be created in the 5 IITs started after 2014 to facilitate education for 6,500
more students.
Centre of Excellence in AI for Education
A Centre of Excellence in Artificial Intelligence for education to be set up with a total outlay of ₹ 500
crore.
RD
2/1/25, 1:25 PM Press Release:Press Information Bureau
https://pib.gov.in/PressReleseDetail.aspx?PRID=2098382&reg=3&lang=1 3/11
Expansion of medical education
10,000 additional seats to be added in medical colleges and hospitals next year, adding to 75000 seats in
the next 5 years.
Day Care Cancer Centres in all District Hospitals
Government to set up Day Care Cancer Centres in all district hospitals in the next 3 years, 200 Centres 
in 2025-26.
Strengthening urban livelihoods
A scheme for socio-economic upliftment of urban workers to help them improve their incomes and have
sustainable livelihoods announced.
PM SVANidhi
Scheme to be revamped with enhanced loans from banks, UPI linked credit cards with ₹ 30,000 limit,
and capacity building support.
Social Security Scheme for Welfare of Online Platform Workers
Government to arrange for identity cards, registration on e-Shram portal and healthcare under PM Jan
Arogya Yojna, for gig-workers.
 
II. Investing in the Economy
Public Private Partnership in Infrastructure
Infrastructure-related ministries to come up with a 3-year pipeline of projects in PPP mode, States also
encouraged.
Support to States for Infrastructure
An outlay of ₹1.5 lakh crore proposed for the 50-year interest free loans to states for capital expenditure
and incentives for reforms.
Asset Monetization Plan 2025-30
Second Plan for 2025-30 to plough back capital of ₹ 10 lakh crore in new projects announced.
Jal Jeevan Mission
Mission to be extended until 2028 with an enhanced total outlay.
Urban Challenge Fund
An Urban Challenge Fund of ₹ 1 lakh crore announced to implement the proposals for ‘Cities as Growth
Hubs’, ‘Creative Redevelopment of Cities’ and ‘Water and Sanitation’, allocation of ₹ 10,000 crore
proposed for 2025-26.
Nuclear Energy Mission for Viksit Bharat
Amendments to the Atomic Energy Act and the Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage Act to be taken up.
2/1/25, 1:25 PM Press Release:Press Information Bureau
https://pib.gov.in/PressReleseDetail.aspx?PRID=2098382&reg=3&lang=1 4/11
Nuclear Energy Mission for research & development of Small Modular Reactors (SMR) with an outlay
of ₹20,000 crore to be set up, 5 indigenously developed SMRs to be operational by 2033.
Shipbuilding
The Shipbuilding Financial Assistance Policy to be revamped.
Large ships above a specified size to be included in the infrastructure harmonized master list (HML).
Maritime Development Fund
A Maritime Development Fund with a corpus of ₹ 25,000 crore to be set up, with up to 49 per cent
contribution by the Government, and the balance from ports and private sector.
UDAN - Regional Connectivity Scheme
A modified UDAN scheme announced to enhance regional connectivity to 120 new destinations and
carry 4 crore passengers in the next 10 years.
Also to support helipads and smaller airports in hilly, aspirational, and North East region districts.
Greenfield Airport in Bihar
Greenfield airports announced in Bihar, in addition to the expansion of the capacity of Patna airport and
a brownfield airport at Bihta.
Western Koshi Canal Project in Mithilanchal
Financial support for the Western Koshi Canal ERM Project in Bihar.
Mining Sector Reforms
A policy for recovery of critical minerals from tailings to be brought out.
SWAMIH Fund 2
A fund of ₹ 15,000 crore aimed at expeditious completion of another 1 lakh dwelling units, with
contribution from the Government, banks and private investors announced.
Tourism for employment-led growth
Top 50 tourist destination sites in the country to be developed in partnership with states through a
challenge mode.
 
III. Investing in Innovation
Research, Development and Innovation
₹20,000 crore to be allocated to implement private sector driven Research, Development and Innovation
initiative announced in the July Budget.
Deep Tech Fund of Funds
Deep Tech Fund of Funds to be explored to catalyze the next generation startups.
PM Research Fellowship
2/1/25, 1:25 PM Press Release:Press Information Bureau
https://pib.gov.in/PressReleseDetail.aspx?PRID=2098382&reg=3&lang=1 5/11
10,000 fellowships for technological research in IITs and IISc with enhanced financial support.
Gene Bank for Crops Germplasm
2  Gene Bank with 10 lakh germplasm lines to be set up for future food and nutritional security.
National Geospatial Mission
A National Geospatial Mission announced to develop foundational geospatial infrastructure and data.
Gyan Bharatam Mission
A Gyan Bharatam Mission for survey, documentation and conservation of our manuscript heritage with
academic institutions, museums, libraries and private collectors to be undertaken to cover more than 1
crore manuscripts announced.
EXPORTS AS THE 4 ENGINE OF DEVELOPMENT
Export Promotion Mission
An Export Promotion Mission, with sectoral and ministerial targets, driven jointly by the Ministries of
Commerce, MSME, and Finance to be set up.
BharatTradeNet
‘BharatTradeNet’ (BTN) for international trade to be set-up as a unified platform for trade
documentation and financing solutions.
National Framework for GCC
A national framework to be formulated as guidance to states for promoting Global Capability Centres in
emerging tier 2 cities.
REFORMS AS FUEL: FINANCIAL SECTOR REFORMS AND DEVELOPMENT
FDI in Insurance Sector
The FDI limit for the insurance sector to be raised from 74 to 100 per cent, for those companies which
invest the entire premium in India.
Credit Enhancement Facility by NaBFID
NaBFID to set up a ‘Partial Credit Enhancement Facility’ for corporate bonds for infrastructure.
Grameen Credit Score
Public Sector Banks to develop ‘Grameen Credit Score’ framework to serve the credit needs of SHG
members and people in rural areas.
Pension Sector
A forum for regulatory coordination and development of pension products to be set up.
High Level Committee for Regulatory Reforms
nd
TH
2/1/25, 1:25 PM Press Release:Press Information Bureau
https://pib.gov.in/PressReleseDetail.aspx?PRID=2098382&reg=3&lang=1 6/11
A High-Level Committee for Regulatory Reforms to be set up for a review of all non-financial sector
regulations, certifications, licenses, and permissions.
Investment Friendliness Index of States
An Investment Friendliness Index of States to be launched in 2025 to further the spirit of competitive
cooperative federalism anounced.
Jan Vishwas Bill 2.0
The Jan Vishwas Bill 2.0 to decriminalize more than 100 provisions in various laws.
 
PART B
 
DIRECT TAX
 
No personal income tax payable upto income of Rs 12 lakh (i.e. average income of Rs 1 lakh per month
other than special rate income such as capital gains) under the new regime.
This limit will be Rs 12.75 lakh for salaried tax payers, due to standard deduction of Rs 75,000.
The new structure will substantially reduce the taxes of the middle class and leave more money in their
hands, boosting household consumption, savings and investment.
The new Income-Tax Bill to be clear and direct in text so as to make it simple to understand for
taxpayers and tax administration, leading to tax certainty and reduced litigation.
Revenue of about ₹ 1 lakh crore in direct taxes will be forgone.
 
Revised tax rate structure
 
In the new tax regime, the revised tax rate structure will stand as follows:
 
0-4 lakh rupees Nil
4-8 lakh rupees 5 percent
8-12 lakh rupees 10 percent
12-16 lakh rupees 15 percent
16-20 lakh rupees 20 percent
2/1/25, 1:25 PM Press Release:Press Information Bureau
https://pib.gov.in/PressReleseDetail.aspx?PRID=2098382&reg=3&lang=1 7/11
20- 24 lakh rupees 25 percent
Above 24 lakh rupees 30 percent
 
 
TDS/TCS rationalization for easing difficulties
 
Rationalization of Tax Deduction at Source (TDS) by reducing number of rates and thresholds above
which TDS is deducted.
The limit for tax deduction on interest for senior citizens doubled from the present Rs 50,000 to Rs 1
lakh.
The annual limit of Rs 2.40 lakh for TDS on rent increased to Rs 6 lakh.
The threshold to collect tax at source (TCS) on remittances under RBI’s Liberalized Remittance Scheme
(LRS) increased from Rs 7 lakh to Rs 10 lakh.
The provisions of the higher TDS deduction will apply only in non-PAN cases.
Decriminalization for the cases of delay of payment of TCS up to the due date of filing statement.
 
 
Reducing Compliance Burden
 
Reduction of compliance burden for small charitable trusts/institutions by increasing their period of
registration from 5 years to 10 years.
 
The benefit of claiming the annual value of self-occupied properties as nil will be extended for two such
self-occupied properties without any condition.
 
Ease of Doing Business
 
Introduction of a scheme for determining arm's length price of international transaction for a block
period of three years.
Expansion of the scope of safe harbour rules to reduce litigation and provide certainty in international
taxation.
Exemption of withdrawals made from National Savings Scheme (NSS) by individuals on or after the
29th of August, 2024.
Similar treatment to NPS Vatsalya accounts as is available to normal NPS accounts, subject to overall
limits.
 
2/1/25, 1:25 PM Press Release:Press Information Bureau
https://pib.gov.in/PressReleseDetail.aspx?PRID=2098382&reg=3&lang=1 8/11
Employment and Investment
 
Tax certainty for electronics manufacturing Schemes
 
Presumptive taxation regime for non-residents who provide services to a resident company that is
establishing or operating an electronics manufacturing facility.
Introduction of a safe harbour for tax certainty for non-residents who store components for supply to
specified electronics manufacturing units.
 
Tonnage Tax Scheme for Inland Vessels
 
The benefits of existing tonnage tax scheme to be extended to inland vessels registered  under the
Indian Vessels Act, 2021 to promote inland water transport in the country.
 
 
Extension for incorporation of Start-Ups
Extension of the period of incorporation by 5 years to allow the benefit available to start-ups
incorporated before 1.4.2030.
 
 
Alternate Investment Funds (AIFs)
 
Certainty of taxation on the gains from securities to Category I and Category II AIFs which are
undertaking investments in infrastructure and other such sectors.
 
 
Extension of investment date for Sovereign and Pension Funds
 
Extension of the date of making investments in Sovereign Wealth Funds and Pension Funds by
five more years, to 31st March, 2030, to promote funding from them to the infrastructure sector.
 
 
INDIRECT TAX
Rationalisation of Customs Tariff Structure for Industrial Goods
2/1/25, 1:25 PM Press Release:Press Information Bureau
https://pib.gov.in/PressReleseDetail.aspx?PRID=2098382&reg=3&lang=1 9/11
Union Budget 2025-26 proposes to:
i. Remove seven tariff rates. This is over and above the seven tariff rates removed in 2023-24
budget. After this, there will be only eight remaining tariff rates including ‘zero’ rate.
ii. Apply appropriate cess to broadly maintain effective duty incidence except on a few items, where
such incidence will reduce marginally.
iii. Levy not more than one cess or surcharge. Therefore Social Welfare Surcharge on 82 tariff lines
that are subject to a cess, exempted.
Revenue of about ₹ 2600 crore in indirect taxes will be forgone.
Relief on import of Drugs/Medicines
36 lifesaving drugs and medicines fully exempted from Basic Customs Duty (BCD).
6 lifesaving medicines to attract concessional customs duty of 5%.
Specified drugs and medicines under Patient Assistance Programmes run by pharmaceutical companies
fully exempted from BCD; 37 more medicines added along with 13 new patient assistance programmes.
Support to Domestic Manufacturing and Value addition
Critical Minerals :
Cobalt powder and waste, the scrap of lithium-ion battery, Lead, Zinc and 12 more critical minerals fully
exempted from BCD.
Textiles:
Two more types of shuttle-less looms fully exempted textile machinery.
BCD rate on knitted fabrics revised from “10% or 20%” to “20% or ` 115 per kg, whichever is higher.
Electronic Goods:
BCD on Interactive Flat Panel Display (IFPD) increased from 10% to 20% .
BCD reduced to 5% on Open Cell and other components.
BCD on parts of Open Cells exempted.
Lithium Ion Battery:
35 additional capital goods for EV battery manufacturing, and 28 additional capital goods for mobile
phone battery manufacturing exempted.
 Shipping Sector: 
Exemption of BCD on raw materials, components, consumables or parts for the manufacture of ships
extended for another ten years.
The same dispensation to continue for ship breaking.
Telecommunication: 
BCD reduced from 20% to 10% on Carrier Grade ethernet switches.
Export Promotion
Handicraft Goods:
Time period for export extended  from six months to one year, further extendable by another three
months, if required.
Nine items added to list of duty-free inputs.
2/1/25, 1:25 PM Press Release:Press Information Bureau
https://pib.gov.in/PressReleseDetail.aspx?PRID=2098382&reg=3&lang=1 10/11
Leather sector:         
BCD on Wet Blue leather fully exempted.
Crust leather exempted from 20% export duty.
Marine products:
BCD reduced from 30% to 5% on Frozen Fish Paste (Surimi) for manufacture and export of its analogue
products.
BCD reduced from 15% to 5% on fish hydrolysate for manufacture of fish and shrimp feeds.
Domestic MROs for Railway Goods: 
Railways MROs to benefit similar to the aircraft and ships MROs in terms of import of repair items.
Time limit extended for export of such items from 6 months to one year and made further extendable by
one year.
Trade facilitation
Time limit for Provisional Assessment: 
For finalising the provisional assessment, time-limit of two years fixed, extendable by a year.
Voluntary Compliance:
A new provision introduced to enable importers or exporters, after clearance of goods, to voluntarily
declare material facts and pay duty with interest but without penalty.
Extended Time for End Use:
Time limit for the end-use of imported inputs in the relevant rules extended from six months to one year.
Such importers to file only quarterly statements instead of a monthly statement.
*****
NB/RC/VV/KS/CNAN/GS/SC/AG/NJ
(Release ID: 2098353) Visitor Counter : 1286
2/1/25, 1:25 PM Press Release:Press Information Bureau
https://pib.gov.in/PressReleseDetail.aspx?PRID=2098382&reg=3&lang=1 11/11