EPFO — Information Booklet for Employers of Newly Covered Establishments
Source: https://www.epfindia.gov.in/site_docs/PDFs/MiscPDFs/Employer_Information_Booklet.pdf

INFORMATION BOOKLET
For the employers of the newly 
covered establishments
EPFO
Employees’ Provident Fund Organization
Ministry of Labour & Employment
Contents
Contents
3
Welcome
4
Return of ownership
5-6
DSC & E-sign
02
7-8
UAN e-KYC seeding
Contributions 
16-18
Guidelines for e-KYC 
seeding
14-15
Duties & 
responsibilities
Closure of PF Code
11
Member claims
13
9-10
12
Penal damages
Dear Employer,
EPFO warmly welcomes you to one of the world’s largest social security
organization.
EPFO as you would know is responsible for offering social security coverage to
the organized sector workforce touching millions of lives. It offers its members a
myriad of services, which includes provident fund, insurance and pension both for
members and their families.
EPFO has over 6.42 crore contributory members making it one of the largest
financial entities in the country. The total corpus of EPFO stood over ₹17 lakh
crores. In terms of asset size, it ranks 8th among all sovereign pension funds and
16th among all pension funds of the world.
We are happy to enter into a partnership with you for ensuring adequate social
security cover for the nation’s workforce. For this, it is necessary that you are
aware of the various benefits provided for the members and the requirements to
be fulfilled at your end so that the common objective of employee well-being can
be achieved. As a part of ease of doing business, all the functions including
registration, inspection and payments are made online and physical interaction is
discouraged.
In order to support both the employers and the employees in their
interaction/interface with EPFO information booklets have been prepared for both
the employers and the employees. This toolkit can be used as a ready reckoner
for this purpose.
Welcome
Welcome03
EMPLOYERS – A VALUABLE PARTNER IN NATION BUILDING
Form 5A of EPF is a return of Ownership which is normally submitted
to the EPFO at the time the company is covered by EPF Schemes for
the first time . This form shows owners/partners or Directors of the
company who is responsible for the conduct of the business of the
company . In form 5A details of employers only is given though the
company may be managed by the Manager or any the person
RETURN OF OWNERSHIP
 After registration and allotment of PF code employers to submit online Form 5A
using your establishment login credentials. ->Establishment->Form 5A duly
attested by DSC/e-sign. FORM 5A contains details of ownership and branches of
establishment, if any and other vital details like Bank A/C number, Mobile Number,
Email Id etc.
 Form 5A Return should be updated as and when there is a change in ownership,
name of the establishment, Address, Bank Account, Mobile Number, E-mail, etc.
 You can obtain a sub code number for a branch, if required and the same may be
furnished in Form 5A.
 To obtain sub code number for branch unit, the same may be furnished under
Branch/Division details and subsequently furnish the details in Establishment ->
Branches (Form 2A).
Form 5A
RETURN OF OWNERSHIP04
Online process
Digital Signature Certificates (DSC) are the digital equivalent (that is
electronic format) of physical or paper certificates .
E-Sign is an online electronic signature service that can facilitate an
Aadhaar holder to digitally sign a document . An Aadhaar holder can
now sign a document after Biometric/One Time Password
authentication thus requiring no paper -based application form or
documents .
DSC & E-SIGN
DSC (USB Token) to be registered through establishment login->Establishment-
>DSC/e-sign -> Digital Signature Registration to generate and download the request
letter in establishment letter head duly signed by the DSC holder and submit to the
concerned PF office in duplicate for approval. (Revoke option for de-registration of
DSC/E-Sign).
DSC & E-Sign
DSC & E-SIGN05
DSC Online process
E-SIGN to be registered through establishment login->Establishment-> DSC/e-sign ->
e-sign Registration and select “Click here to register e-sign of a person whose DSC is
already registered” to generate and download the request letter in establishment
letter head duly signed by the DSC holder and submit to the concerned PF office in
duplicate for approval.
E-SIGN to be registered for Non DSC holder, select -> e-sign Registration and furnish
the required details (i.e., name as per Aadhaar, designation, gender, Date of Birth and
VID number) to generate and download the request letter in establishment letter
head duly signed and submit to the concerned PF office in duplicate for approval.
E-Sign Online process
AUTHENTICATING TRANSACTION 
USING DSC & E-SIGN
For renewal of DSC, the above said method should be followed.
-Revoke means de -registration of DSC/E -Sign. In case the revoke 
button is pressed erroneously, follow the methods as on prepage to re -
register DSC/e -Sign again.
-For using DSC, Computer/Laptop should be configured with the 
support of Mozilla Firefox version 48.0 along with latest Java (32 bit). 
Further, add the following exceptional sites at Control
Panel -> Java Security Tab. 
https:// unifiedportal -emp.epfindia.gov.in /Employer_digital_signature.php -
https:// unifiedportal -emp.epfindia.gov.in /epfo /activity/ 
https:// unifiedportalemp.epfindia.gov.in /epfo /activity/ viewMemberActivitySummary / 
https:// unifiedportalemp.epfindia.gov.in /epfo /digitalSignature /certificate/ getOption
https:// unifiedportalemp.epfindia.gov.in /epfo /digitalSignature /certificate/ getOption.php
https:// unifiedportalemp.epfindia.gov.in /epfo /owner/ digitalSignature /certificate/ getOption
https:// unifiedportal -emp.epfindia.gov.in /
Important 
Notes
DSC & E-SIGN06
All transactions or requests need to be approved by Digital Signature 
Certificate(DSC)/e -sign
DSC is provided by authorised vendors whereas e -sign is a AADHAR 
based facility for enabling authentication.
• Provision to create new UAN for employees is available under
Member -> Register -Individual .
• Obtain self -declaration in Form 11 (to be retained by the employer
for future reference) from each member with copies of KYC
documents .
• If the employees already having a UAN, the same can be mapped
to the current establishment by selecting “YES” in Previous
Employment/UAN . The details of employees' name, date of birth
and gender should match with the provided in AADHAAR
• After creation of UAN, the Aadhaar KYC should be approved
through DSC/e -sign through Member -> Approve KYC pending for
Digital Signature
• Registration of Bulk employees also available in Member ->
Register -Bulk
• Establishment can also make use of Member Location Mapping
feature available in the portal to map or link each employee
locations, in case the establishment has branches . For this
branches in Form 5A should be furnished
UAN & KYC SEEDING
CREATING UAN 
UAN & KYC SEEDING07
• Ensure that for employees who are already having a UAN, their mandatory KYC
details i.e., Aadhaar and Bank account are linked with their UAN. The option for
linking KYCs in bulk with UAN is available under Member -> KYC BULK.
• Individual employee can also seed KYCs through their member interface and the
same may be pending at Member -> Approve KYC seeded by member. The same
may be approved with DSC/e- sign.
• Guidelines for Seeding of Mandatory KYCs with UAN explained in detail on page
16-18 of this document
SEEDING OF KYCs:
• By using establishment login employers shall be able to update your
employee details and file their KYC details also.
• It is necessary that the profile of all employees enrolled by the
establishment is complete in all respects and is also updated periodically
whenever required. If there are missing details, it can use Missing details
option under the Menu Member for filling the details.
• Establishments should mark date of Exit in respect of employees who have
left their employment.
• Active members list is available in the login to check the member’s details
along with their UAN and KYC details.
• Member must be facilitated to activate his UAN through the Employee
portal
• Establishments can verify the members AADHAAR Card to compare the
member’s Name, Gender, Date of Birth recorded in it with that available in
the database under the ‘Active Members Details’
• Mismatch of details can be set right by asking the member to raise a
request online through Employee Portal
• Approval needs to be done by DSC/e-sign.
UPDATING EMPLOYEES’ DETAILS AND KYC
UPDATING UAN 
UPDATING EMPLOYEES’ DETAILS 08
• Contribution is to be made mandatorily in respect of employees whose
salary is Rs.15000 p.m or lower. However, other employees who are paid
higher can become members on a voluntary basis.
• An employee can contribute more than 12% of Rs 15,000 if they wish to do
so. However, there is no obligation that the employer has to match the
employee’s contribution.
• To become members on a voluntary basis and to pay contribution on
higher wages, a joint request from both employer and employee is
required.
CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE FUND
PRESENT RATES
CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE FUND09
 Monthly contribution shall be paid by the employer by filing ECR under Payment -
>ECR/RETURN filing on or before 15th of every month.
 Monthly contribution shall be paid through ONLINE only.
 Contribution is rounded to the nearest rupee for each employee.
 In case the establishment is exempted under EDLI Scheme, (no need to remit
under A/c.No.21)
 Inspection charges @ 0.005% on total wages, subject to minimum of Rs.1/- is
payable in A/c.No.22.
 Non-remittance of PF contribution deducted from employees’ wages shall be
construed as Criminal breach of Trust, punishable under section 405/406 of Indian
Penal Code.
IMPORTANT NOTES

 Contributions are payable on maximum wage ceiling of Rs .15 ,000 /-
 The employee can pay at a higher rate (wages above Rs .15 ,000 ) and in
such case employer is not under any obligation to pay at such higher rate .
 To pay contribution on higher wages, a joint request from both employer
and employee is required [Para 26 (6) of EPF Scheme] . In such case
employer has to pay Administrative charges in A/c .No .2 on the higher
wages . (wages above Rs .15 ,000 /-).
 For an International Worker, wage ceiling of Rs .15 ,000 /- is not applicable
on contribution
CONTRIBUTIONS UNDER EPF, EPS & EDLI
EPF, (A/c.No.1)
CONTRIBUTIONS UNDER EPF, EPS & EDLI10
 Pension contribution is payable by employer only .
 Pension contribution should not be recovered from employee .
 Pension contribution not to be paid when :
 An employee crosses 58 years of age and is still in service (EPS
membership ceases on completion of 58 years) .
 An EPS pensioner is drawing Reduced Pension and re -joins as an
employee .
 In both the cases, the pension contribution (8.33 %) is to be added to
the employer’s share (3.67 %) of PF . i.e., total employer’s share (12 %)
goes to PF only .
 In case an employee who is not existing EPF/EPS member joins on
or after 01 .09 .2014 with wages above Rs .15 ,000 /-, no need to pay
pension contribution and the total employer’s share (12 %) goes to PF
only .
 EDLI Contribution (in A/c .No .21 ) to be paid on up to maximum wage ceiling
of Rs .15 ,000 /- even if PF is paid on higher wages .
 EDLI Contribution to be paid even if member has crossed 58 years of age
and pension contribution is not payable . This is to be paid as long as the
member is in service and PF is being paid .
EPS, (A/c.No.1o)
EDLI, (A/c.No.21)
o Monthly contribution shall be paid by the employer  
through the portal https://unifiedportal-
emp.epfindia.gov.in/epfo/  on or  before 15th of every
month .
o ECR format available in Payment -> ECR Upload ->
click ECR Help File .
ELECTRONIC
CHALLAN -
CUM -RETURN
(ECR)

 Ensure that all the employees who are enrolled under EPF, their
member profile is updated . If any missing details are there,
employer can use missing details option under Member Menu to
complete it. This will facilitate the members in availing seamless
service .
MEMBER CLAIMS
MEMBER PROFILE
MEMBER CLAIMS11
 Ensure that all claims are filed by the employees through online
mode only to ensure speedy settlement .
 To enable filing of online claims UAN of the members have
mandatory KYCs of Aadhaar and bank account .
 Whenever a member submits transfer claim through online, it has
to be forwarded to concern EPFO field office immediately . Such
transfer claims pendency can be viewed by the employer under
Online Services -> Transfer Claims in the establishment portal .
 If the member submits manual transfer claim in Form – 13, the
employer has to promptly attest and forward the Claim to EPF
Office .
PF CLAIMS
TRANSFER CLAIMS
• Provident fund benefits which makes them financially secure in their
old age and provide them aid in times of need.
• Pension benefits in the form of monthly members pension besides
widow/ widower pension, children pension, Orphan pension,
Dependent/ Parents pension. The minimum pension is Rs 1000 as of
now.
• Insurance benefits linked to the member’s PF accumulations in case
of death in harness.
WHAT ARE THE BENEFITS AVAILABLE TO MY EMPLOYEES?
• In addition to penal damages and penal interest failure to remit
contributions may result in prosecution and other penal actions.
• Deduction of PF contribution from the wages of employee and fail to remit
the same is criminal breach of trust and actions shall be initiated invoking
the relevant provisions of Indian Penal Code.
WHAT IF CONTRIBUTIONS ARE NOT 
MADE?
• As a part of ease of doing business and digitization of all services, e-inspection
notice is available in the employer portal for the default period. Employers
need to submit response within specific time period or else necessary legal
action would be initiated against the establishment.
• The damages shall be calculated to the nearest rupee, 0.50 paise or more to
be counted as the nearest higher rupee and fraction of a rupee less than 0.50
paise to be ignored.
• In order to avoid this additional liability, the employer should ensure that
remittances within the stipulated time, i.e., on or before 15th of every month
through ECR.
• For remittance of Penalty use Payments -> ECR/RETURN filing -> Direct
Challan -> Challan Entry -> Select Miscellaneous charges challan wherein
Penal Damages for 14B dues and Miscellaneous for 7Q dues.
Rates of PD 
and Interest
PENAL DAMAGES12
Period of Default Rates of Damages Rate of Penal 
Interest
Less than 2 months 5%
Simple interest at the 
rate of 12% per 
annum for each day 
of the default or 
delay in payment of 
contribution.
2 months and above but less 
than 4 months 10%
4 months and above but less 
than 6 months 15%
6 months and above
25%
(It may correspondingly
go up to 100%)
In case of winding up of business or for any other reason, the
establishment ceases to exist, employer may apply for
deregistration of the establishment . Request for deregistration may
be accompanied by relevant supporting documents like Dissolution
deed, Surrender of Government licenses, copy of Cancellation of
Rental Agreement . if any . This has to be done promptly, so that the
establishment is not flagged as non -complying establishment .
CLOSURE OF PF CODE
Documentation 
required
CLOSURE OF PF CODE13
Even if there are no eligible employees for making PF contributions
and the establishment wants to keep the EPF Code, they are
directed to pay Rs.75 /- per month as the prescribed minimum
Administrative Charges in A/c .No.2 through Payments ->
ECR/RETURN filing -> Direct Challan -> Challan Entry -> Select
Administrative/inspection charges challan under establishment
portal .
CONTINUE PF CODE 
WITHOUT MEMBERS
DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF 
THE EMPLOYER
Documentation 
required
DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES14
CCONTINUE PF CODE 
WITHOUT MEMBERS
• Enroll all eligible employees for the social security benefits in the
establishment.
• In case, engaging services of contract employees, ensure they are
covered directly under you or through a contractor.
• In case the contractor has his/her PF code ensure that the same is
updated in the Principal Employer Portal and ensure compliance.
• Kindly note that non enrolment defeats the very purpose of the Act and
Schemes and gives rise to a disgruntled and insecure workforce which
will be costly in the long run.
• This is in addition to the various penal actions that would follow.
• Do not enroll individuals who are not associated with your
establishment as members by making false declarations.
• Appoint a responsible officer of your establishment as the Authorised
Signatory as all actions taken him/her will be legally binding on the 
employer.
• In all cases where the employer himself does not transact the business
and relies on others including the Authorised Signatory for doing the
same, utmost caution must be exercised as the
establishment/employer will be held responsible for all acts of
omission and commission.
• Take steps to educate your employees about the various schemes and
their benefits, in particular the KYC details and nomination details of
your employees are always upto date. This shall enable the members or
dependents to claim the PF benefits without any hassle.
• Maintain confidentiality of your establishment’s login credentials and
do not share them with unauthorized persons.
DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF 
THE EMPLOYER
Documentation 
required
DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES15
CCONTINUE PF CODE 
WITHOUT MEMBERS
• Assist the members to file online claim whenever they are in need of
withdrawing from their PF accounts on account of various reasons
permissible under the scheme like illness, housing, marriage, education 
etc.
• When the employee leaves employment assist in either filing transfer
claim or filing final withdrawal claim of leaving employment on
retirement.
• Assist your employee’s family members to claim the EDLI benefits and
widow or widower pension and children pension in case of unfortunate
demise of your employee.
• Please transact all PF related business only through the official
website:
Prayaas is an endeavor to release Pension to the eligible
EPS members on the day of Superannuation . Special
efforts are being taken by field offices to educate the
members of the EPS 1995 who are due to superannuate
within 3 months along with their employers so that they
can submit pension claims complete d in every respect
and EPFO can issue PPO on the day of superannuation to
such members .
Cooperation and support of the employers is solicited to
make this noble endeavor successful .
Prayaas

 Updating the missing members details through “establishment login ->
Dashboard –> Missing details” .
 For left employees, to mark Date of Exit through “establishment login ->
Member -> Member Profile -> search UAN -> mark Date of Exit” and
approve the same through “Member -> Approvals - >Approve” . For bulk
uploading use “establishment login ->Member -> Exit -Bulk” .
 Downloading Active Members List to check the live members’ details
along with UAN, KYC details through “establishment login -> Dashboard
-> Active Members details” in Excel format .
GUIDELINES FOR SEEDING OF MANDATORY e-KYCs
PREPARATORY WORK BY THE EMPLOYER
SEEDING OF MANDATORY e-KYCs16
ACTIVATION OF UAN: [BOTH EMPLOYER & MEMBER]
 If the member’s mobile number reflected against his UAN in Active
Members List, it meant that the said UAN is already
activated/registered .
 If not, the member’s mobile number should be activated through
“Member e-Sewa -> Important Links -> Activate UAN” . *Required data
for activation : UAN, Name & Date of Birth as per active members list,
own mobile number, email id (optional)]
 After activation of UAN, member will get the password and the same
will be reset in “Member e- Sewa” login as desired by the member .
 In case the password is forgotten, the member has to use “Forget
Password” option in “Member e-Sewa” .
 Member has to click option “YES” to get the password to the registered
mobile number .
 In case the registered mobile number is not in use/misplaced, the
member has to click “NO” to get the password to the new mobile
number subject to the following conditions :
 If the KYCs Aadhaar & PAN had already seeded, password may be
obtained through new mobile number .
 If not, the member has to seed the Aadhaar or PAN through their
employers as mentioned below .
 Verify member’s Aadhaar Card having Date of Birth in full form i.e.,
DD/MM/YYYY . If not in full form, download e-Aadhaar card from UIDAI
portal or obtain fresh e-Aadhaar card from Aadhaar enrolment centers
(or) e-Sewa centers .
 Compare member’s name, Date of birth & Gender with Aadhaar Card and
Active Member details .
 In case of any mismatch in Name, Date of Birth and Gender, the member
can apply correction request through ONLINE :
 Member can furnish the required details through “Member e-Sewa login -
> Manage -> Modify Basic Details” for correcting the same .
 In case Date of Birth mismatch is more than 1 year, please upload
anyone of the following mandatory proof for his correct date of birth i.e.,
Birth Certificate, School leaving certificate, 10th Mark Sheet, Passport,
Service Certificates issued by the Govt .
 Employer can approve the same thro “Establishment login -> member ->
Bulk Process modify basic details request” with Digital Signature
(DSC)/e -sign . On approval, the same will be automatically forwarded to
concerned Field (EPFO) office .
 After approval made by the field office, the Members’ Aadhaar will be
automatically seeded with their UAN After correction made by Field
Office
GUIDELINES FOR SEEDING OF MANDATORY e-KYCs
SEEDING OF AADHAAR WITH UAN: [BOTH EMPLOYER & MEMBER]
SEEDING OF MANDATORY e-KYCs17
 The member can seed the Aadhaar through ONLINE using
“www .epfindia .gov .in -> online services -> eKYC Portal” .
 (For this processing, OTP will be sent to the registered mobile number in
Aadhaar)
 The member can seed the KYCs Aadhaar & Bank through “Member e-Sewa -
> Manage - > KYC -> Add KYC -> Aadhaar & Bank -> SAVE” and the same
may be approved by the employer through “establishment login -> member -
> Approve KYC seeded by member - > Approve with DSC/e -sign” .
KYCs Uploading : (By Member)
GUIDELINES FOR SEEDING OF MANDATORY e-KYCs
SEEDING OF MANDATORY e-KYCs18
The employer has to enter the KYCs data through :
Establishment login -> member ->member profile -> search UAN -> KYC
-> Add KYC -> Aadhaar & Bank -> SAVE” and approve the same through
“Member -> Approve KYC seeded by member -> Approve with DSC/e -
sign” .
Pending KYCs for approval/Member basic details for approve & reject
functionality / approval of KYC seeded at the time of member
registration are shown in establishment login -> HOME PAGE as
ALERT’S .
After completion of the KYCs seeding, the same will be reflected in
Member e-Sewa portal and the employer can also view the same in
Active member list .
KYCs Uploading/Approving : (By Employer)
WAYS TO CONNECT WITH EPFO
UMANG Mobile app, 
Helpdesk: 1800118005
www.epfindia.gov.in
Dedicated portals 
www.epfigms.gov.in,
www.pgportal.gov.in
Social media handles: 
Twitter at @socialepfo 
Facebook at /socialepfo
Facilitation centers at the 
field offices are the 
service of all stakeholders
CONNECT WITH EPFO
CONNECT WITH EPFO19
Dedicated 
revamped 
grievance portal 
EPFiGMS for 
handling 
grievances 
digitally
Regular holding of 
Webinars by field 
offices for awareness 
generation and 
solving grievances of 
employers, 
employees and 
pensioners.
WhatsApp based 
helpline cum 
grievance redressal 
mechanism where 
subscribers, 
employers and 
pensioners can file 
grievances or seek 
guidance on any 
issue 
Technical issues about 
Member Interface-
memberfeedback@epfindi
a.gov.in
Technical issues about 
Member Interface-
memberfeedback@epfindi
a.gov.in
RESPONSIBILITY CENTERS
RESPONSIBILITY CENTERS
www.epfindia.gov.in
@socialepfo
/socialepfo
The responsibility centers in these offices reach out to the 
clients and ensure extension of the Social Security services
PANDIT DEENDAYAL UPADHYAYA NATIONAL ACADEMY OF SOCIAL SECURITY
Employees’ Provident Fund Organization
Ministry of Labour & Employment
Government of India New Delhi
EPFO has a nationwide presence
21 ZONAL 
OFFICES
138 REGIONAL 
OFFICES
117 DISTRICT 
OFFICES
पंडित दीनदयाल उपाध्याय राष्ट्रीय सामाजिक सुरक्षा अकादमी
कममचारी भविष्ट्य ननधि संगठन
श्रम एंि रोिगार मंत्रालय
भारत सरकार नई ददल्ली
1st November 2022